Good afternoon.
Welcome to the open source
Apple and You session.
We're going to spend a few
minutes today and talk a bit about
Apple's open source projects,
what we're doing with our open
source efforts here at Apple,
where we're going to be going from here,
and probably the most important aspect
of it is how you guys can participate.
If you've been following
us over the past few years,
you've noticed we have a
number of open source projects.
We'll give you some status on
these and some new stuff as well.
To kind of get into that,
we have a few new open source
projects we'd like to announce today.
The first one is Open Directory.
This one now joins the rest
of the open source projects.
Open Directory is our, basically,
directory services layer of Mac OS X.
The abstraction layer of the system
for dealing with directory service,
the interfaces into things like
LDAP and NetInfo and a number of
other directory service solutions.
The next one is CUPS,
which is our new common
Unix printing system,
which is kind of the
underlying technology for the
new print system in Jaguar.
and a bunch of additional Darwin goodies.
Things like IPv6,
which is now part of Jaguar, IPsec,
and we've also integrated OpenLDAP,
NetSNMP, and PAM for some of the
security services and such.
And there's a number of other
projects that have been updated and
other bits and pieces of Darwin that
are all brand spanking new.
And in addition,
we've added yet more pieces
from Core Foundation.
You know, I've been kind of slowly
but surely in CF Lite,
that's part of Darwin,
and adding more pieces from the
Core Foundation and bringing that
down into the open source layer.
It kind of represents the kind of
the insulation layer between the
Darwin open source activities and
the rest of the Mac OS X world.
And so as those,
since that line is fairly blurry,
we have been trying to bring
technologies that make sense
down into the open source layer.
Common Data Security Architecture,
or CDSA, is one we actually
open sourced last year.
But it's one of particular interest,
and I would hope if you haven't
had a chance to get involved in it,
you would.
CDSA is actually an open group standard,
and it's basically the layer
that deals with security,
number of security features in Mac OS X,
specifically things like encryption
and authentication in particular.
As I mentioned earlier, just briefly,
we now have PAM support
as part of Darwin.
Basically, PAM is programmable
authentication modules,
which allow a common way to deal with
authentication at the command line.
The various tools, things like Telnet,
stuff like that,
that may need authentication,
go through one common set
of libraries called PAM.
Well,
PAM is actually integrated into CDSA,
our security framework for Mac OS X,
so that there is one consistent set
of behaviors for how authentication
is done within the system.
CDSA also provides a number of plug-in
mechanisms for being able to deal with,
again, cryptography,
for certificate management stuff,
and for key management and
other authentication pieces.
I think the most important message we'd
like to get out around CDSA is that,
one, it's an incredibly powerful set of
abstractions for dealing with security,
and if you are working with code,
for example, that uses OpenSSL,
CDSA is actually something that
we believe should be replacing
OpenSSL as a way for doing secure
transport kinds of services.
And the reason being is that CDSA allows
so many more ways to be able to
support authentication and encryption,
whereas OpenSSL does a great
job of handling the secure
sockets layer communication,
but doesn't provide very many ways for
dealing with different types of security.
Certificates are things like
smart cards or other types
of authentication services.
Thank you.
Other technology we've rolled into
Darwin includes IPv6 and IPSec.
This is actually some
pretty exciting work,
and we've been working with a COM-A team
to actually get this into Darwin.
We're excited to announce that the
COM-A team will be joined as committers
as part of the Darwin open source effort.
The documentation project is another
important one which I encourage
people to get involved with.
We never have enough documentation
for all the technology we have.
There are some key pieces that
we support as part of our open
source efforts so you can help out.
A HeaderDoc, which is a set of tools for
being able to have embedded
documentation within source code,
within the headers.
I/O Kit uses this heavily so that
basically all the APIs and services
for I/O Kit are actually embedded
in the headers for the source code.
And HeaderDoc extracts all
that and presents it in an
HTML format so it's web-browsable.
There's a number of ways that you
can get involved in documentation
efforts in the open source,
particularly in how-tos,
helping with things like man pages
and XML tools and other things.
There's quite a lot of things
that you can get involved with.
We've done a lot in Jaguar to bring a
number of man pages onto the system,
but there's a lot more yet to be done.
So, you know, come land to hand.
We've, as far as more specific and
focused documentation within
our documentation efforts,
I/O Kit and other kind of bits
and pieces of the I/O system have
been documented at various levels.
There's another of online full
documents for these things,
as well as a number of
kernel pieces and such.
So if you haven't had a
chance to go check out the
site and see what we've got,
we've got to encourage you to do so.
So the key thing with open source
is it's not just an Apple effort,
it's a community effort.
And we've been working really hard to
create opportunities for collaboration.
And there's actually a lot of folks
who have been working really hard
with us and on their own to help
contribute to our open source efforts.
In particular, just in the Darwin layer,
we've been working directly
with the FreeBSD team.
There's the work on PAM.
A lot of the work of integrating
that actually came from one
of our open source developers.
Of course, Patchy is a key partner.
And then a number of other services.
X386 is another key one who has
been also working very hard.
A lot of folks in the community
doing some great work.
The Darwin community has actually been
remarkably busy in taking Darwin and
moving it onto the x86 platform.
And in fact, just recently, I believe,
we had a meeting with a group
of people at the Darwin Center.
They've got it up and running
now on AMD chips as well.
So if you're interested in playing
it open source at the core level,
all the Core OS pieces have actually
been ported to another platform.
The streaming server has also been
ported to a number of platforms.
It runs on Linux and Windows.
And we'll tell you a bit more about
that later in the session here.
But it's pretty exciting.
It's all over the place.
And the same for open play.
It's great to see not only the
technologies that run on our platform,
but also the capabilities that we have.
But to really take advantage of the
open source movement is to really get
them into even broader communities.
I think one of the most exciting things
that was just announced last night,
if you guys saw the press release,
is that the OpenOffice project
is being ported to Mac OS X.
And we'll give you a little bit more
information about that in a little bit.
But it's pretty exciting.
It's quite an impressive
piece of software.
And then I think probably the most
important thing from our open source
efforts is the fact that last week
we helped launch OpenDarwin.org,
which is basically a way for
more people to get involved
in the open source activities.
Darwin, our opensource.apple.com efforts
have been great for kind of
publishing the open source,
and we have some great relationships
with a number of committers.
But to really make it work,
we need to allow it really
to be opened up even further,
to allow more forms of communication
and ways that people can participate in.
And OpenDarwin.org really allows
the community to help drive the
open source efforts in key ways.
and we'll talk more about
that in a few minutes as well.
So a number of new Darwin committers.
Darwin committers are folks that we've
established an even tighter relationship
and they have right access to our open
source repositories and can make changes.
And there's folks from the CAMA team,
a number of documentation folks
who have joined the committee list,
and Robert Watson who's actually
dealing with the trusted BSD.
There's a whole effort on
creating a secure trusted
OS platform based on Darwin.
- Mm-mm.
So we have a number of folks who
are going to come and tell you more
about the various technologies.
And next up on the
list is Jordan Hubbard,
who will tell you about Darwin.
I manage the BSD technology
group at Apple,
and we're basically the folks
who are tasked with merging all
the good bits from free BSD.
We also do the official
Darwin releases for PowerPC and x86.
I'm going to talk a little bit
about the evolution of Darwin,
and what we've done with the
Open Darwin project recently,
if this would work.
Okay, oh yes, point it the right way.
So, in the three years
since we started Darwin,
we've gotten a lot of feedback
on how the project is run,
both good and bad.
People obviously really like the
idea of Apple doing open source
and participating to this extent,
but they've wanted more
consistent and real-time access
to bug tracking information.
They've wanted to have more people
be able to change the sources.
One thing about the way Darwin is run,
which is kind of cool actually,
is that you have access to
the live CVS repository.
So, if you make a change,
it's a Darwin committer that goes
straight into the active sources
that we use to build a product.
The downside of that is that you
have access to the live repository,
and as you might expect,
there are considerable controls
that are put on this process in
order that people not break stuff.
So, there needed to be... sort
of a wider access without
a complete loss of control,
and I'll talk a little
bit more about that.
Another thing that people
have been asking for is
more access to project news.
They want to be able to put up
bulletins when some significant event
in the open source space takes place.
They want to evangelize and
announce their own little
sub-projects or working groups.
And while marketing has been sort
of the sole arbiter of what goes
up on the open source website,
this is pretty slow to change
and pretty tightly controlled.
Um... And they just... Basically,
the community has wanted to
drive the presentation of
Darwin to a much greater extent.
They want to determine a lot more
of the look and feel and how the
project is presented and sort
of what face it puts forward.
So, that brings us to opendarwin.org,
which those of you who read Slashdot
have probably read about last week.
It basically was founded
jointly by Apple and the
Internet Software Consortium.
But Apple does not control the site.
Apple has basically... Bootstrapped it.
It is now run day-to-day by the ISC,
however.
And the community will essentially
dictate how that project evolves.
Sorry again.
It's... The CVS repository
is completely open.
So, you don't need to sign any
click-through licenses or do anything
special to check out sources.
You can do it via non-CVS today.
If you want to join the
project as a committer,
someone who has write access,
that's a fairly lightweight process.
You go to a little web page.
You fill out a form describing what
you want to do and who you are.
And right now,
this is basically... It goes
to the opendarwin core team,
which has three people
to start with on it,
who will sort of eyeball it for
correctness and goodness and,
in pretty much all cases,
just to prove it.
All the bug tracking news
and documentation is now
community maintained.
So, we've adopted Bugzilla
for the time being.
If people have a better solution,
we're certainly willing to hear it.
Again, the community will drive this.
So, we will determine which
tools we want to use.
We will determine what sort of
infrastructure we want to provide.
And all of that is entirely
outside of Apple's control.
We also would like to leverage
the infrastructure in interesting
new ways as we go along.
So, rather than just hosting Darwin and
OpenPlay and sort of projects like that,
we would like to look at new projects,
potentially.
Some people have already come forward,
said, "Oh,
we're going to do this." Some people have
already started saying they would like
to have kind of a working area to port
KDE to Darwin and be able to collaborate
and have their own CVS repository,
their own mailing lists.
And all of that infrastructure is
currently provided at opendarwin.org.
So,
we can do that kind of thing very easily.
sort of a CVS map as it has existed up
to now and as it exists going forward.
Right now, there's a one-way pool.
You can, as a developer,
sign up for an account with
the Darwin project and have
read-only access to the bits,
basically the click-through license.
If you make changes,
you can either get those changes
submitted via a web form,
or if you're a Darwin committer,
which is one of the select
few that can actually write,
then...
This can either go straight
back to the CVS repository
if you're a Darwin committer,
or somebody at Apple looks at the
web form submissions and commits
it for you if they deem it worthy.
So now we have kind of an
interesting new piece of the puzzle.
OpenDarwin.org is a completely
separate CVS repository,
as I said.
And what we're basically
doing is we will pull,
on an hourly basis,
copies of the Darwin CVS repository onto
OpenDarwin.org as a reference repository.
That will not be the live repository.
That will simply be there close
at hand for the convenience of
the committers in OpenDarwin.
We'll probably also,
we haven't done this yet,
but we'll probably mirror
the FreeBSD CVS repository,
NATBSD, OpenBSD,
any other reference code bases
we think might be valuable or
interesting will be available for
reference purposes on OpenDarwin.org.
However,
the live OpenDarwin CVS repository,
which has started out sort of basically
being a copy of the Darwin CVS but
can now migrate or mutate in all
kinds of interesting new ways,
will be a two-way street.
So the community can commit
their changes straight to it.
They can pull it.
They can have a lot more
control over where it goes.
Some of the initiatives we've
been working on in Darwin as well
are just overall make Darwin and
Mac OS X a better Unix citizen.
Make it easier to port
legacy applications.
We've heard a lot of requests for
some sort of ports collection.
And as one of the original authors
of the FreeBSD ports collection,
I obviously have a lot of ideas
on how that might be evolved.
And maybe it's second system syndrome.
Maybe it's really the
benefit of hindsight at work.
I'm not sure.
But my team is working on something
along the lines of the FreeBSD ports
collection for Darwin right now.
We hope it will be a lot more
extensible and scalable in many ways.
We're also looking constantly at
people's requests for more Unix APIs,
more standard POSIX calls that
might have been missing up to
now for one reason or the other.
Missing headers, libraries,
basically anything people need to be
able to port software more easily.
And one thing you're going to
see in the next development.
Developers CD is something
called the BSD SDK,
which includes all of the headers
and libraries for things that
people have been missing up to now,
like OpenSSL, for example.
If you have a legacy
application that uses OpenSSL,
you don't want to port it to CDSA.
That's no problem.
We've got you covered.
We'll ship the full headers from
now on in the BSD SDK package.
Same goes for TCL, Libcurl, Libbzip,
a whole bunch of different things
will basically go into that bucket.
So when you install the developer tools,
just click on the custom.
Okay.
And check it off on the list,
and you'll get all that
stuff now for free.
Again, this is for porting
legacy Unix applications.
Obviously, there are a lot of high-level
APIs that you can and should use
if you're writing new applications.
But this is all designed
to make it easier for Unix
folks to port their stuff.
We are, as I said, actively working on
synchronizing with FreeBSD.
We've done some major code
pull-ups from FreeBSD 4.4 recently.
And this is an ongoing process.
We hope to track FreeBSD with far
less latency than we have in the past.
Darwin was originally
forked from FreeBSD 3.2.
So as you might expect,
there was a lot of work that we
needed to do to kind of bring it
up to snuff and bring it current.
But we have more bodies
on this problem now,
and we hope to be staying much more
closely in sync with FreeBSD and
other open source projects as well.
And last but definitely not least,
we are definitely working on
making Darwin easier to build.
And this is another goal.
And this is a goal that OpenDarwin
Project will be instrumental on,
because its developers won't be
able to be very effective until
they can build the entire system,
install it on another system,
and sort of have reproducible results.
So I hope that the community will
get actively involved in this and
helping us to evolve that process.
Oops.
Some new things that are in Darwin,
as Brett has already said.
We are fully supporting the
Linux slash BSD PAM API.
So if you have PAM modules
from other Unix systems,
they should port straight across.
We also have a PAM module
for security frameworks,
which means there's basically one
chain of authentication by default.
It would be pretty confusing
if it was a Y shape,
so that's not the default behavior.
But if you're an administrator and you
know what you're doing and you want
to have different PAM authenticators,
you can plug them in,
you can change the ordering,
it's all up to you.
We are now a first
class Kerberos citizen.
We have been working very closely with
MIT over the last year to provide a
world class Kerberos implementation,
a full Kerberos implementation.
And we have integrated that into
security frameworks as well,
so now everything from Telnet to the
login window can support Kerberos.
And we've updated many,
many different pieces.
As I say, there was the FreeBSD merge,
but we've also updated Apache, SendMail,
Emacs, Samba.
We brought Samba into the desktop.
We've brought in the product by default,
so you can do SMB sharing
from the desktop.
We've brought in a bunch
of additional languages.
We've brought in Python.
So we're listening very closely to
what the Unix community has been
asking for and updating those things.
And as I said, we're always working on
cleaning up the APIs.
We basically want to be a really good
Unix from a perspective of portability.
We've also been working pretty
closely with the X486 project.
Tory Lyons, who unfortunately couldn't
be here this year,
is a Darwin committer and
a X486 core team member,
or at least a prominent developer.
And he has done a lot of work,
along with the rest of the X486 team,
in making sure that X486 is
well supported on Mac OS X.
You can now run it on a separate display,
or you can run it rootless,
which means your X windows show
up on the same desktop as your
Mac OS X native applications.
And the basic goals,
as I understand them,
are to work on acceleration now.
Phase one was to make it
work and make it work well,
and now they want to make it work fast.
And that goes for both 2D
and OpenGL 3D performance.
So I'll look for some really
interesting developments there.
And there are also people who are
working right now on better sort
of aqua-themed window managers that
make it all appear very seamless,
whether it's an X application
or a 10 application.
Here are some URLs you can
go to for further reference.
opensource.apple.com remains the
canonical Darwin reference site.
Well, actually, /darwin remains the
Darwin reference site.
This is for all sorts of
open source efforts at Apple,
of which Darwin is only one.
We have the opendarwin.org website now,
which again will be evolving
very rapidly because the
community is driving this now.
They are checking in
changes to the web pages.
It's a very, very young project.
It's only been around for a week.
I encourage you to check
up on it regularly because
it will be changing very,
very rapidly.
Some of our sister projects, of course,
are projects that we use: FreeBSD,
Apache, Samba, and so forth.
The ExxonX project is sort of the
codename for XFREAT6 on Mac OS X.
You can check that out as well.
Some other sessions you
might want to go to.
We're having a BOF tonight at 7.30,
and so you'll be able to ask me and
lots of other Darwin folks questions.
There is a feedback forum as well
where you can ask a lot of different
people questions at 3.30 on Wednesday,
and there are various
Darwin sessions sprinkled
throughout the rest of the week,
so check your schedules.
Thanks.
Thank you, Jordan.
One year ago, we started looking for a
printing system for Darwin.
The obvious answer was LPD,
but just as Darwin is the
substrate for Mac OS X,
we wanted a printing system in
Darwin that would also be the
basis for our OS X printing system.
And to be kind,
LPD just wasn't going to cut it.
So we started looking,
we broadened our search a little bit,
and we found CUPS,
Common Unix Printing System.
It's written by a company in Maryland,
Easy Software Products.
Cups is available under the
GNU General Public License,
so it's open source,
and so we can use it in Darwin.
It's also built upon the
Internet Printing Protocol.
Luckily for us,
our Mac OS X printing system
was also designed around the
Internet Printing Protocol,
so we had a nice fit there.
Cups includes strong PostScript printer
description file format support.
In fact, that's really the core of Cups.
We've been using PPDs on Mac OSes
going back about 10 or 12 years.
So again, a very nice fit for us.
Cups includes both BSD and System 5
command line tools for printing.
This was very important to us.
We wanted people who were coming
to Darwin to feel very comfortable
when they started printing.
So whichever flavor of
Unix you're coming from,
you'll find the commands to
print that you're used to.
Cups is well documented.
The Easy Software folks do an
excellent job of documenting Cups.
There's a vibrant community
surrounding Cups as well.
That is also really anchored
by the Easy Software folks,
but there are other parts of the open
source community that also back Cups.
The KDE group is one great example,
as are some of the different
Linux distributions,
all backing Cups, all providing support,
all providing momentum
as it moves forward.
So how can you learn more about CUPS?
Well, the obvious answer is to
go to the CUPS website.
And again,
Easy Software supports this website.
You'll find mailing lists and
newsgroups on that website.
There are about a half dozen
documents there describing
CUPS from different vantage points,
be it user, administrator, or developer.
So you can go there.
But the best way to learn
CUPS is to get the CUPS book.
It's written by Michael Sweet.
He is the architect of CUPS.
It's an excellent book.
I own three of them.
I have them all over the place.
And the Developer Depot folks
have been kind enough to stock
them across the way for this week.
There's a limited number.
If you want one, I'd suggest you get one.
But it really is the
best way to learn CUPS.
Once you've read the source code,
read the documentation, read the book,
we'd love you to get
involved and help us out.
Again, this printing system is
not only part of Darwin,
but also Mac OS X.
So if you help us out with
the open source part of it,
you'll see some of your changes
flowing through into Mac OS X.
We can never have enough printer drivers.
So if you have a printer
that's not supported,
don't complain to me anymore.
You can go write your own driver.
If you have expertise that we don't
have or you just really know something,
come help us.
Kerberos support.
If you understand the different
variants of Kerberos printing,
please bring it on.
Help me out.
And log viewers.
CUPS is great about
logging different things,
and there's all sorts of log formats.
We'll find things.
three or four of them in the system.
Log viewers and log filters
would be more than welcome.
We're very excited about CUPS.
Again,
we're excited to have CUPS in Darwin.
We're excited to have CUPS in Mac OS X.
We want to hear your feedback.
So we have the birds
of a feather tonight.
If you have opinions about CUPS,
it's a great place to bring
them and let us hear them.
There's a Darwin printing
session tomorrow.
Michael Sweet, again,
the architect of CUPS,
has graciously flown out here.
He'll be giving that session.
It's an excellent session.
Please do not miss it.
He's really done a great job.
There's a Darwin feedback forum.
If you have questions about CUPS,
please bring them there.
And on Thursday,
I'll be giving the Mac OS X printing
session where I'll be explaining
how we use CUPS in Mac OS X.
It's not on the slide,
but there is also a feedback forum.
It's the last session of the
conference on Friday afternoon.
It's the graphics and
imaging feedback forum.
If you have OS X printing questions,
please bring them there.
So again, CUPS, it's open.
Please help us push it forward.
It's a great printing system,
and if you help us,
we can really move it.
So please help us out.
David O'Rourke is now going to come out
and talk to you about Open Directory.
Thank you.
Hi, thank you all for coming today.
My name is David O'Rourke.
I'm working on Open Directory.
This is a very exciting project for me.
I went directly to Roadmap, wrong way.
Open Directory.
This is a new name today.
It covers both the
client access technology,
APIs to access the
and server software.
We feel that Open Directory combines
industry standard protocol access,
and we think it's just a really,
really important technology.
Much of this technology has already
shipped with Mac OS 10.0 and 10.1,
so what we are finally doing is
making that core technology that
10.0 has been based on since day one
open source to the community so that
it can be moved to other platforms,
and also just to show
people how we do it.
So it's part of Darwin.
It's published on the website today.
You can go and download the source bases.
We'd love your feedback.
My team is new to the
open source community,
so we're just starting to
monitor the Darwin thing,
and we got questions three years ago
as to when we would open source this,
and I can say, well, today's the day.
So what is Open Directory?
The first thing it entails
is Open Directory access.
That consists of two major binaries.
The Open Directory... Mac OS 10.0
directory service process and LookUpD,
which has been part of
Darwin from day one.
It includes directory server technology.
We're integrating Open LDAP with
NetInfo for Jaguar,
but we also have NetInfo,
and that has always been part
of the open source technology,
so we have both an access
technology and a server technology.
Apple also ships a number of integrated
tools for managing the directory.
All of these tools, the desktop tools,
system preferences, users panel,
all of this Mac OS 10.0 server
tools use and are based on
Open Directory technology,
so these tools can manage any data
for which Open Directory can access.
I think a picture might help you
understand directory services,
which is the standard
three-layer architecture.
In the blue box,
you have Mac OS X software.
If you call the directory service APIs,
it will figure out which directory
system has been configured for access
and route it to the appropriate plug-in
that you see here in the red dialogs.
What we've open sourced today is
NetInfo and the LDAPv2 plug-in.
We will be open sourcing a
plug-in for BSD ETSI files,
and there will be other plug-ins that
we'll be open sourcing in the future.
If you want to hear about those plug-ins,
I encourage you to either
speak with me afterwards or,
better yet,
attend my session on Thursday.
That's session 813,
and we'll be going into much more
detail about this architecture.
So as part of Darwin today,
I'm sorry the URL is out of date.
www.apple.com.darwin will get
you to the Darwin website.
Directory services consist of an
API framework and a daemon process.
That's open source.
LDAPv2, NetInfo, and we have a plugin
called the Search Policy,
which implements how the system
goes looking for users in a
multi-node directory system.
For Jaguar, we'll be open sourcing
DSAgent for LookUpD.
We'll be open sourcing our
LDAPv3 ReadWrite plugin.
And we'll be open sourcing our
BSD Configuration File plugin,
which is read-only.
An opportunity for the community would
be to make that plugin read-write.
Service Discovery plugins
will be open sourced as well.
And these plugins allow you to discover
services on the network via AppleTalk,
Rendezvous, SLP,
and the SMB Windows protocol.
So if you want to hear more about
the Service Discovery plugins,
I would encourage you to
attend my session on Thursday.
It's not only about directory access,
it's also about what Apple's providing
as a directory server for our customers.
For Mac OS 10.1,
NetInfo is included with Darwin and
included with Mac OS 10.1.
Mac OS, it's part of Darwin.
It provides both a standalone and
shared network configuration repository,
and many people have used this to manage
thousands of machines on their network.
So NetInfo is open to the community.
I believe it's already been ported
to Linux and some other platforms.
We're adopting OpenLDAP for Jaguar,
so we have two open source,
very powerful directory servers that
we're shipping as part of both TIN,
the retail product, and Darwin.
As a roadmap, there's the Darwin Birds of
the Feather session tonight.
I would encourage you to go to the
security and authorization session.
Jordan mentioned earlier that our
PAM module calls the security framework.
Well,
the security framework turns around and
calls directory services in some cases
to verify the user's names and passwords.
So that will give you more perspective.
We're also working on how we're
tying PAM to the security framework
to directory services to allow
authentication to be out of any directory
system of the customer's choice.
There's always the Darwin Feedback Forum.
There's my session on
Thursday for directory services,
and following in the same exact
room is the Kerberos session.
So I would encourage you
to attend that as well.
At this time,
I'd like to introduce Chris LeCroy,
who will talk to you about
the Darwin Streaming Server.
Thank you for your time.
Hi, everybody.
So I'm going to talk pretty briefly
about Darwin Streaming Server.
You're going to hear me say
QuickTime Streaming Server a lot,
and the reason for that
is that Darwin Streaming
Server and QuickTime Streaming
Server are the same thing.
Mac OS X, we call it QuickTime Streaming
Server or QTSS,
so just be aware of that.
So kind of a general status.
We're about three years old now.
We released the first version
of QuickTime Streaming
Server in April of 99,
and we just released in
February version 4 of the server,
and I'll go over some of the new
features in a minute about that.
Since then, we've had over 300,000
downloads of the server.
That's a lot of downloads for a server,
especially a streaming server,
which is a pretty narrow niche of people
who are doing streaming out there.
We obviously are open source.
That's why I'm here,
and we've made it so it's really
easy to port to other platforms.
We have a couple of files that basically
provide whatever layer you need,
that provide kind of a layer abstraction
or an abstraction from the OS,
and it's really easy to port to
anything that's POSIX compliant.
It's fairly, well,
kind of a medium effort to port it to
things that are not POSIX compliant,
and we're completely standards-based.
Some of the other streaming solutions
out there use proprietary protocols
and codecs and things like that.
We are using RTSP, RTP, RTCP, SDP, HTTP,
MP3, and just about any other kind of
streaming standard you can think
of or acronym you can think of.
So what's new?
In 4, we have... Enhanced the module API.
So QuickTime streaming server contains a
module API sort of like what Apache has.
You can write modules that can either
be dynamically loaded into the server
or statically linked into the server if
you want to rebuild the server itself.
And this is basically where all the
functionality for the server comes from.
So being able to stream
QuickTime movies was done as a module.
Being able to rebroadcast live
broadcast stuff was done as a module.
Being able to do access live
And then the service logging
was done as a module.
So everything's done as a module.
And we've enhanced the APIs as we
do in just about every release.
I'll give you a little more detail
on what we did there in a minute.
We've completely
redesigned the web admin.
So QuickTime streaming server has
a web-based administration console.
Works in any browser.
And we've basically just
completely revamped it.
We hired a really good engineer
who's really good at this stuff.
And so it works a lot better.
It looks a lot better.
Much easier for developers to
extend if they want to extend it.
And actually,
if you want to take a look at this stuff,
you can come to our session later,
which I'll tell you about in a minute,
too.
We've added support for automated relays.
So what that is is streaming
servers send streams to clients.
Well, there are times when you may
need a streaming server to send
a stream to another server,
which then sends off to a client.
In the past,
that was pretty complicated to set up.
So we've kind of made it
so it's automatic now.
Server A can announce to Server B that
it wants to relay something,
and it just magically works
using standard protocols again.
And we've added UI for
that in the web admin.
and we've added native MP3 streaming.
And what I mean by native
MP3 streaming is shoutcast,
icecast compatible streaming.
We don't do encoding.
All we do is the
reflection of the stream,
but we've, because we're using
standard protocols again,
you can use things like the LAME encoder
to hook into the stream if you
want to do any kind of transcoding.
We have support for serving
MP3 straight off disk though,
but we're not doing any encoding.
We've added MPEG-4 support.
QuickTime Streaming Server can now
serve any ISO-compliant MPEG-4 file.
That means that in addition to being able
to send streams to QuickTime players,
you can now send to any
compliant MPEG-4 player.
We expect this to really open things up.
This is a great new standard.
And as always,
we've made some performance improvements.
So let me show you the performance
improvements we've done this time.
So back with QTSS 1,
we were doing 1,000 streams
off a single machine.
And with each release
we've increased that.
We're now up to 4,000.
And I think with the next release,
we'll probably be going
a little bit higher even.
I think we've got a few
more tricks up our sleeves.
In terms of the module API enhancements,
So you can build more powerful
and new types of modules now.
And the major reason for this is
our API is really object oriented.
And what I mean by that is that
there are actual objects that get
passed into modules and they can
call methods on those objects.
Prior to QTSS 4, though,
modules could not declare and
instantiate their own objects,
objects that they owned.
And they can do that now.
And that makes it easier to
write much more powerful modules.
We've also listened to developers
and provided some documentation
on some things that people
have been screaming for.
We've documented our
reliable RTP protocol,
which the marketing term is
skip protection for that.
So if anybody's writing a compliant
player or a compliant server,
that's documented now.
We've also documented our implementation
of tunneling RTSP over HTTP.
So if you want to write a
server or a player again,
that's documented.
And we've also got some
caching protocol extensions.
So for developers who are writing
streaming caches or proxies,
we've documented those extensions
so that they can take advantage of
some of the really good things that
those protocol extensions provide.
So here's where I beg.
So if you want to help us out,
we have a lot of pressure to get
new features into the release or
into the server every release.
So some of the things that are
really difficult for my team to do
are some of the things that would be
nice for the open source community,
like autoconf support.
I would love it if somebody
would raise their hand right now.
Anybody?
And volunteer for autoconf support.
Also, we have great packaging
mechanism on Mac OS X.
On the other platforms,
we basically live with
tar files and zip files.
And it would be really nice if
somebody could kind of step up
and do some native packaging,
like install Shield for
Windows or RPMs for Linux.
And as always,
developer documentation is always
something we could use help with.
Just documenting how the
server works internally,
documenting the source code,
things like that.
So that's my plea for help.
Places that you can learn more
about this online are we have
a mailing list for developers.
It's pretty low traffic and
it's pretty high quality.
You can go to lists.apple.com and it's
a streaming server developers mailing
list that you want to subscribe to.
I can always go up to the Apple open
source website to find more
information about the Darwin Streaming
Server as well as any of the
open source projects at Apple.
And because the QuickTime Streaming
Server is the Darwin Streaming Server and
we also work very tightly with QuickTime,
the QuickTime site is also a great place
for getting information about some of
the things you can do with the server.
And in terms of a roadmap,
so we've got a full-blown streaming
server session on Thursday,
and we'll have some engineers showing
how you can customize the server,
how to write a module, things like that.
We'll go into the new features in a
little bit more detail as well there.
There's a session on
QuickTime and MPEG-4.
If you want to get a
technical overview of that,
that's Friday in Room A2.
And we will have server people
at the QuickTime feedback forum,
so if you want to provide
any feedback there,
we'd be happy.
We'd love to hear it.
I think that's it.
So next is Ed Peterlin.
He's going to talk about open office.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Edward Peterlin.
I'm a contributor from the
openoffice.org community.
I specifically work on
the OS X porting effort.
Well, first question that we usually get,
what is OpenOffice.org?
OpenOffice.org is an open source
project for technology within Sun's
Star Office productivity suite.
A while ago, Sun open sourced the source
code for Star Office and
released it for our community,
and we've been working on porting efforts
ever since to support new platforms.
We're supporting Linux PowerPC and x86,
Solaris and Windows.
Mac OS X developer
build is now available.
It's a great time for us.
We've had 1.0 released
on our major platforms,
x86, Flourish Windows, and now OS X.
And it supports Darwin as well.
Several more ports are under development.
FreeBSD, RX264, Amiga, talks of AIX,
HPUX, and there's over 21 languages
that it can run native in.
On the OS X team, we kind of developed a
porting roadmap here.
Our first stage was to
build and link on Mac OS X.
There were lots of technical issues
that really held us up since April 2001
when we've been working on this.
Next, we need to get up to the
OpenOffice 1.0.org source.
We're just so far behind,
we need to catch up.
After that, we need to start getting it
to work with the Aqua graphics
layer and core foundation.
GCC3 is released.
We need to get this
working for new compilers.
We need printing support.
Installation help.
And after all of this is done,
then we need beta testers, end users,
and release 1.0 testing.
So, I'm here to make a plea to
get developers to help us.
We've only had less than 10
people ever work on this port.
And right now,
there are only three active coders.
So, it's been a long time and
we need everyone we can get.
But the cool thing is, you know what?
It built.
It's ready for a demo.
OpenOffice.org consists
of a number of files.
It's an open source productivity
suite that has a major
word processing component,
very similar to MS Word.
You can type.
We can even check spelling in runtime.
We have dictionaries, and it works.
In addition to word processing,
there's also a full
spreadsheet implementation.
The spreadsheet is very similar.
You can use similar formulas from Excel.
We can enter.
We can come down.
Make sums, insert ranges, add numbers.
We even have some basic macro support
coming from opening cell files.
In addition to all of this, there's also
Our word processing component,
which I brought back up by mistake,
but you'll get to see it again.
We also have a drawing component.
Drawing component, again,
we have basic support for two-dimensional
and three-dimensional objects.
And we can also come around,
rotate these objects.
We need people to help us
move this to work with OpenGL.
And...
What I just did there,
ask it to insert an
openoffice.org calc spreadsheet.
See if it'll do it for me.
There we go.
And here, two, three, four.
and David O'Rourke.
What you're seeing here is
our first developer build.
We made this available this
morning from our website.
And that's it for our demo.
So let's figure out, how can you help us?
We just got it building.
This is one and a half weeks old.
This is such an exciting time for
OpenOffice.org in our community.
You can go visit
http://porting.openoffice.org.
This is our main porting website.
From there you can find links
to all the Mac porting websites.
And what's even cooler,
we've had some friends over the weekend
have some little CD burning bashes.
You can get a couple of six packs and
burn developer CDs that we have at our
exhibitors booth in the exhibit hall.
With full binary installers,
double clickable so you
can play with it now.
Full source code from our CVS branch.
Build instructions so you
can work on it tonight.
We need Mac OS X developers.
We need help getting Aqua working.
We're going to support X11 and
Aqua so we can run on OS X and Darwin.
We're going to continue this support.
We need people to help with printing.
We need people to help
with internationalization.
Unicode, font support, everything.
There's so many different areas
of this project you can work on.
Non-developers, you can help too,
even if you don't have
time to contribute.
We're going to need testers.
We need documentation for the
OS X specific portions of this.
We need web and graphics design.
We need people to make screenshots,
make it look nice for end users.
Usability testing.
What the Mac OS X users
need out of this product.
And also local language.
It's an exciting time and
I invite you to come help us.
And now here's Lane who's
going to talk about Open Play.
and I'm here to talk to you
about OpenPlay and give you a
brief description of where we
are with the open source effort.
And let's see.
All right.
Wait a minute.
I did the same thing.
You would come up to bite me,
wouldn't you?
Alright, so, OpenPlay started out as open
source a couple years back,
and one of the latest things
that we've done is we have
integrated NetSprocket into it,
and it's still going to fight me.
What this means is that
NetSprocket's API now is integrated
into the OpenPlay effort.
This gives NetSprocket the ability to
run on every platform that OpenPlay does.
The old NetSprocket source
is still available on the
website if anybody wants it,
but all the future development is
happening with the OpenPlay source.
Okay, the OpenPlay is a networking API.
It's designed to be
protocol and OS independent.
That means that it currently
runs under Mac OS X,
Mac OS, Windows,
and as of a few days ago,
Linux and some various Unix.
Yes, we had somebody do a POSIX version.
So, it also has, of course,
TCP IP as a module and Apple Talk,
although Apple Talk is only
for the classic Mac OS.
And if somebody wanted
to take the time to make
Apple Talk work on other platforms,
that would be wonderful.
So, OpenPlay consists of three
different API layers.
There's a game interface,
which is the easiest to use.
It just takes a couple minutes
to get something up and running.
That is the old NetSprocket API.
There's the protocol interface,
which is basically a good wrapper
around the low-level APIs.
This is the old OpenPlay interface.
And then there's the
networking interface,
and these are the net module
wrappers around TCP/IP and AppleTalk.
And that's what gives you
your protocol independence.
It basically looks like
this to your application.
There's the three layers.
They all sit within OpenPlay.
NetSprocket uses the protocol module.
The protocol uses the net module.
And then your application can use
any one or all three of those,
as well as the underlying
raw protocol APIs.
With the new 2.1 release that
was just put up yesterday,
there are two new test and sample apps.
The first is the NetSprocket stress test,
which exists for Mac OS,
and that has given us a lot of
good feedback in making NetSprocket
very bulletproof and able to handle
really good networking loads.
It also helped us track down a few bugs.
The really cool thing is
the new NetSprocket example.
This is a really nice addition
to the open source archive.
Previously,
there was a lot of example applications
and some testing applications,
but nothing that really
showed you how to use the API.
This example does just that.
It separates it all out into one file.
It's a full game with a client, a server.
Players can come in and out.
And you can take that code,
strip out the one file that contains
the NetSprocket or the OpenPlay protocol
API that you want to use,
put it into your application,
do a little bit of modifying,
and you're done.
At least that's the goal.
We also have a lot of titles that are
shipping now that are actually using
OpenPlay or the older NetSprockets APIs.
This is a list of some of them.
There's a lot more and several that are,
of course, in development.
So, now I'll give you a quick
demo of this test application.
Let's see if we can't...
So it's very graphically intense.
This poor machine is going to be
very hard to keep up with all this.
So we're going to start a server.
We're going to run it
on the default port.
We're going to allow the
default number of players,
the default name.
[Transcript missing]
So it connects to it.
You can answer the questions.
It tells the other client
whether it's working or not.
[Transcript missing]
That's basically the quick demo.
That little program there is the
example program that is now provided.
It gives you a really good idea of
how to handle players coming in,
players going out, hosting games,
connecting to games,
and all that good stuff that you need.
And that's the end of the demo.
simple roadmap for this one there is an
actual open play session Thursday two
o'clock it's in room C and I will
be giving a lot of code examples in
there going over that example app
that I just showed step-by-step about
how you connect how you start up a
server and all that good stuff and
now we'll have somebody else come
back on stage and wrap it up Thanks,
man.
Thanks again, Lane.
All right.
Open source.
[Transcript missing]
If you've been watching
us over the past couple,
three years, you should see a real trend.
We're just constantly
increasing our involvement in
the open source activities.
You see more projects,
you see more committers,
more opportunities for
you to get involved.
We certainly, you know,
hopefully you see a trend here.
This is something we
take pretty seriously.
There's a number of conferences that
if you're in the open source community
at large and you're interested
in participating or seeing more,
we're going to be at USNICS this June,
MacHack, of course,
which is always lots of fun, the O'Reilly
Open Source Conference in July,
and if we can get Steve to
allow us to fly over there,
we're going to sneak a trip
over to BSDCon in Europe.
So, you know, certainly there's a lot
of other conferences we're
trying to get involved in.
The benefit of these other
forums is actually to get
more and more people involved.
The BSD community and some of
the open source developers.
The more they learn about TEN,
the more excited they get and the
more they want to participate as well.